

  Internet Draft                                             Eric A. Hall 
  Document: draft-hall-status-opcode-00-1.txt                  Consultant 
  Expires: April, 2002                                       October 2001 
      
      
                           The DNS "Status" OPCODE 
      
      
     Status of this Memo 
      
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
     progress." 
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
          http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
          http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
      
  1.      Abstract 
      
     RFC 1034 defined the DNS OPCODE value of "2" as "status," but the 
     description for the status OPCODE only says "to be defined." This 
     document defines a use for the status OPCODE which allows 
     administrators to query a specific DNS server, and to retrieve a 
     snapshot "profile" for the status of the zones which are currently 
     being served by that server. 
      
     The information provided by this query type is different from the 
     data provided through normal "in-band" DNS queries, and is 
     primarily intended to benefit the operators of large-scale DNS 
     installations with complex replication and caching configurations. 
      
   
   
  Internet Draft    draft-hall-status-opcode-00-1.txt     October 2001 
   
   
      
     Table of Contents 
      
     1.   Abstract..................................................1 
     2.   Overview..................................................2 
     3.   Status Query Messages.....................................3 
       3.1.  Header Values..........................................3 
       3.2.  The Question Section...................................3 
     4.   Status Response Messages..................................4 
       4.1.  Header Values..........................................4 
       4.2.  The Question Section...................................6 
       4.3.  The Answer Section.....................................6 
       4.4.  The Authority Section..................................8 
       4.5.  The Additional-Data Section............................8 
     5.   Transport Issues..........................................8 
     6.   Security Considerations...................................9 
      
      
  2.      Overview 
      
     This protocol is NOT intended to reproduce the information which 
     is currently available through traditional DNS queries for Start-
     of-Authority and Name Server resource records. Instead, this 
     mechanism is intended to facilitate improved zone management 
     through the provision of a standardized protocol for the retrieval 
     of server-specific zone configuration data. 
      
     The protocol defined in this document provides a simple set of 
     mechanisms for querying a server for information about the zones 
     that server is currently configured to serve. Queries can identify 
     specific zones, or can request status information about all of the 
     zones which are currently configured on that server. 
      
     The response information includes details such as the current 
     status of the zone, and the replication partners associated with 
     that server's copy of the zone (which may be different from the 
     in-zone authoritative server list). Each response is encapsulated 
     as a separate DNS message with its own flags, thereby allowing a 
     server to generate unique responses for each zone. Responses can 
     indicate that the zone is operating "normally" with a specific 
     version, that the zone is inaccessible (SERVFAIL), or that the 
     client is not allowed to query the specified zone (REFUSED), among 
     other responses. 
      
   
  Hall                   I-D Expires: April 2002              [page 2] 
  Internet Draft    draft-hall-status-opcode-00-1.txt     October 2001 
   
   
      
  3.      Status Query Messages 
      
     Status query messages follow the same basic model as most other 
     query types, although there are some unique qualities. 
      
      
  3.1.    Header Values 
      
     Each unique query is required to be identified with a reasonably 
     unique Message-ID. Response messages will echo the Message-ID 
     value, providing a rudimentary query-response matching service. 
      
     The QR flag MUST be set to "0" on queries, signifying that the 
     message is a query. 
      
     The OPCODE field MUST be set to "2", signifying that the message 
     is a status message. 
      
     The AA, TC, RD and RA flags MUST be set to "0" for the query 
     messages. Note that status messages are only valid when sent 
     directly to a server, and recursion is expressly forbidden. 
     Servers which receive status messages MUST NOT forward the message 
     or initiate recursion on behalf of the client, regardless of the 
     state of the RD flag. 
      
     The RCODE field MUST be set to "0" in status queries. 
      
     The QDCOUNT value MUST reflect the number of zones being 
     requested, as identified by the number of entries in the Question 
     Section. Valid values for this field are either "0" or "1". 
      
     The ANCOUNT, NSCOUNT and ARCOUNT values MUST be "0" in status 
     queries. The Answer, Authority and Additional-Data sections MUST 
     be empty in status query messages. 
      
      
  3.2.    The Question Section 
      
     Clients may request information about all of the zones on a 
     server, or may request information about one particular zone. 
      
     A query which contains an empty (non-existent) question section 
     (with a QDCOUNT of "0") is used to request information about all 
     of the zones configured on that server. The queried server MAY 
     respond with a single message (signifying an error, or that there 
   
  Hall                   I-D Expires: April 2002              [page 3] 
  Internet Draft    draft-hall-status-opcode-00-1.txt     October 2001 
   
   
     is only one configured zone on that server), or MAY respond with 
     multiple messages (one response message for each configured zone). 
      
     Queries MAY identify a specific zone by providing the domain name 
     for that zone in the question section. 
      
     Multiple zones MUST NOT be specified in a single query. If status 
     information for multiple discrete zones is desired, each zone MUST 
     be identified in its own status query message, and with a unique 
     Message-ID value in the message header. 
      
     When a zone is specified, the resource record code of "0" MUST be 
     specified, although the class code MAY be set to any class value 
     (the status OPCODE is a global DNS OPCODE, and is not specific to 
     the IN class). 
      
      
  4.      Status Response Messages 
      
     Status response messages follow the same basic model as most other 
     response types, although there are some unique qualities. 
      
     In particular, each status response generated from a status query 
     MUST be sent as a separate, standalone message. 
      
      
  4.1.    Header Values 
      
     Response messages MUST echo the Message-ID value provided in the 
     associated query message. 
      
     The QR flag MUST be set to "1", signifying that the message is a 
     response. 
      
     The OPCODE field MUST be set to "2", signifying that the message 
     is a status message. 
      
     The AA flag is used to signify whether or not the server is 
     authoritative for the zone specified by this message. If the 
     server believes that it is authoritative for the zone, it MUST 
     specify a value of "1" in the AA flag. If the server does not 
     believe that it is authoritative for the zone (perhaps it is a 
     caching-only server for that zone), then it MUST specify a value 
     of "0" in the AA flag. 
      
   
  Hall                   I-D Expires: April 2002              [page 4] 
  Internet Draft    draft-hall-status-opcode-00-1.txt     October 2001 
   
   
     The TC flag MUST be enabled if the server was unable to fit a 
     complete response in the message. This should rarely occur. 
      
     The RD and RA flags MUST be set to "0" for the response messages. 
      
     The value of the RCODE field will be determined by the disposition 
     status of the query in relation to the zone information being 
     provided in the message. The appropriate values and their meaning 
     are as follows: 
      
        0   The specified zone exists and appears to be operational. 
      
        1   Format Error - there was a problem with the status query. 
      
        2   Server Failure û the server is unable to load the specified 
            zone. This normally indicates an error with the zone 
            database itself, or a communications error with a 
            replication partner. 
      
        3   Non-Existent Domain û the server cannot locate the 
            specified zone. If no zones are provided, this response 
            code indicates that the server is only functioning as a 
            cache, and that it is not configured to serve any zones. 
      
        4   Not Implemented û the server doesn't understand the query. 
      
        5   Query Refused û the client is not authorized to view 
            information about the specified zone. If no zones are 
            provided, the client is not authorized to request 
            information about all of the zones. Note that this is 
            different from telling the client that it is not authorized 
            to request ANY zone (which it may be), but that it is not 
            authorized to request information about ALL of the zones 
            which are configured on that server. 
      
     Note that the RCODE field and AA flag can interact in significant 
     ways. For example, if the AA flag is enabled but the RCODE is set 
     to SERVFAIL, then the server is authoritative for the specified 
     zone, but the zone database is currently unavailable on that 
     server (possibly due to expiration). 
      
     The QDCOUNT, ANCOUNT, NSCOUNT and ARCOUNT values will vary 
     according to the number of entries provided in each section. Note 
     that the QDCOUNT field does not echo the value from the associated 
     query message. 
      
   
  Hall                   I-D Expires: April 2002              [page 5] 
  Internet Draft    draft-hall-status-opcode-00-1.txt     October 2001 
   
   
      
  4.2.    The Question Section 
      
     The Question Section MUST contain the domain name of the zone 
     specified by the current response message. If the response message 
     applies to all of the zones on that server, the question section 
     MUST be empty (non-existent). Each response message which is 
     triggered is likely to have a different Question Section. 
      
     For example, if the queried server is a caching-only server which 
     is only configured to use the root zone, the Question Section of 
     the response message would specify the root domain (with a zero-
     length domain name). 
      
     Similarly, if the queried server was not configured with any 
     zones, the question section would be empty. Furthermore, if the 
     queried server refused to answer a query for all zones, then the 
     question section would also be empty. 
      
     Note that the Question Section of a response message does not 
     signify any relationship with the associated query message. The 
     Question Section of the two messages may be identical, but this 
     will only be a matter of coincidence. Because of this, the 
     Message-ID value will be the only in-band indication of any 
     relationship between a query and a response message pair. 
      
      
  4.3.    The Answer Section 
      
     The Answer Section consists of two units of data: a mandatory 
     Start-of-Authority resource record which identifies the server's 
     current view of the zone, and an optional Text resource record 
     which conveys the server's zone-configuration data. 
      
      
  4.3.1.  Start-of-Authority 
      
     If the Question Section of the response message contains a domain 
     name, the Answer Section MUST contain the Start-of-Authority 
     resource record associated with that zone, where this is possible. 
     If the Start-of-Authority resource record is inaccessible to the 
     queried server, it can only be presumed that the entire zone is 
     inaccessible to that server, so the RCODE field of the response 
     message MUST be set to SERVFAIL. If the question section is empty, 
     there is no associated Start-of-Authority resource record, so this 
     requirement is waived in that situation. 
   
  Hall                   I-D Expires: April 2002              [page 6] 
  Internet Draft    draft-hall-status-opcode-00-1.txt     October 2001 
   
   
      
     If a server is authoritative for the zone, the Start-of-Authority 
     resource record MUST be sourced from that server's copy of the 
     zone. If a server is non-authoritative for the zone (is only 
     configured as a caching agent for the zone), the Start-of-
     Authority resource record MUST come from the local cache if it 
     exists, and MUST be queried for separately if it is not cached. 
      
     The network class for the Start-of-Authority resource record MUST 
     be specified according to the network class being reported. If a 
     zone exists as multiple classes simultaneously, each instance MUST 
     be specified in a separate message. 
      
      
  4.3.2.  Configuration Data 
      
     Any additional configuration data which might be associated with 
     the zone specified in the Question Section MAY be provided in a 
     single Text resource record in the Additional-Data section of the 
     response message. Due to the sensitivity of this information, the 
     inclusion of this information SHOULD be selectively definable by 
     the server administrator. 
      
     If the data is provided, it MUST be read from the configuration 
     repository as-is, without undergoing any formatting or charset 
     conversion. In-line data [such as Tab (0x09)] MUST be preserved, 
     where possible. 
      
     The charset which is used by the server to read and store the 
     configuration data MUST be specified on the first line of the text 
     block, using a "MIME-charset:" prefix, using one of the valid 
     charset identifiers from the IANA repository. If any transfer 
     encoding is required to fit the data within DNS' eight-bit format, 
     this conversion MUST be specified in the "MIME-charset:" field. If 
     these conditions cannot be met, the Text resource record MUST NOT 
     be provided. 
      
     Each line of data included in the Text resource record must be 
     terminated with a Carriage-Return/Linefeed pair (0x0D 0x0A). 
      
     No additional conversion or formatting is allowed. 
      
     Note that it is neither possible nor permitted to return global 
     configuration data. Only configuration data related to a specific 
     zone is retrievable through this optional service. If global 
   
  Hall                   I-D Expires: April 2002              [page 7] 
  Internet Draft    draft-hall-status-opcode-00-1.txt     October 2001 
   
   
     configuration data is required, an external mechanism will need to 
     be used. 
      
      
  4.4.    The Authority Section 
      
     If the zone specified in the Question Section has associated Name 
     Server resource records, those resource records MUST be itemized 
     in the Authority Section of the response message. 
      
     These resource records SHOULD reflect the server's current view of 
     the zone. If the server is currently operating from a "hints" file 
     or some other hard cache, those values should be used for this 
     data. Similarly, if the server is working from an in-memory view 
     of learned Name Server resource records, those values should be 
     used. New queries MUST NOT be issued for the sole purpose of 
     seeding these resource records. 
      
     Each Name Server resource record MUST reflect the current time-to-
     live value associated with the entry in the server's cache. 
      
     The data provided in the Authority Section of the response message 
     MUST NOT be cached by the client, MUST NOT be used to update the 
     client's cache, and MUST be discarded by the client immediately 
     after it is passed to the calling application. 
      
      
  4.5.    The Additional-Data Section 
      
     For each Name Server resource record provided in the Authority 
     Section, an associated address resource record (A, AAAA, A6) MUST 
     be provided in the Additional-Data section. This information 
     SHOULD come from the server's cache, but each resource record MAY 
     be queried for separately if it has not been cached. 
      
     Each address resource record MUST reflect the current time-to-live 
     value associated with the entry in the server's cache. 
      
     The data provided in the Additional-Data Section of the response 
     message MUST NOT be cached by the client, MUST NOT be used to 
     update the client's cache, and MUST be discarded by the client 
     immediately after it is passed to the calling application. 
      
      
  5.      Transport Issues 
      
   
  Hall                   I-D Expires: April 2002              [page 8] 
  Internet Draft    draft-hall-status-opcode-00-1.txt     October 2001 
   
   
     Either UDP or TCP MAY be used for the status transaction. 
     Regardless of which transport protocol is used, each response MUST 
     be provided in a separate DNS message. 
      
      
  6.      Security Considerations 
      
     Without due caution, status queries can expose operational 
     topologies in a manner which is undesirable. For this reason, 
     support for the status query on any given server MUST be OPTIONAL. 
      
     In recognition of the above concerns, the status query MUST NOT be 
     forwarded by DNS servers, as this could allow a malicious user to 
     leverage a trust relationship between two servers in order to gain 
     information which was not available to them directly. For example, 
     if Server-A allows status queries from the network which holds 
     Server-B, then a malicious user could send a status query to 
     Server-B with the recursion desired flag enabled, and Server-A 
     could eventually receive the query and respond to it. In order to 
     prevent this scenario, status queries MUST NOT be forwarded, 
     regardless of the setting of the RD flag. 
      
     Implementations are encouraged to disable this service by default. 
     Implementers MAY allow administrators to selectively enable the 
     status query on a per-zone basis, MAY allow administrators to 
     restrict query processing to specific networks or hosts, and MAY 
     allow administrators to choose the amount of detail returned in 
     the Additional-Data Text resource records. But at the very least, 
     administrators MUST be allowed to enable or disable support for 
     the status query on a global basis. 
      
      
   
  Hall                   I-D Expires: April 2002              [page 9] 
